.TH VIRTU 1 "2026-05-19" "virtu 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
virtu \- GPU passthrough automation for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B virtu
[\fISUBCOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B virtu
is a local-first Rust tool that detects a Linux host's hardware and
software configuration, explains the viable GPU passthrough paths,
generates a verified plan, snapshots every file it may touch, applies
changes atomically with rollback support, and registers a libvirt
domain.

The tool is designed around the principle of honest refusal: rather than
claim to "fix any PC", it explains exactly what is and isn't possible
on the detected host, and only mutates state through a snapshot manifest
that can be replayed in reverse.
.PP
.B virtu
never sends data to remote services, requires no account, and runs
entirely from local data. The bundled knowledge base of GPU quirks and
distro paths is compiled into the binary at build time.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B wizard
Launch the interactive TUI wizard (default when no subcommand is given).
The wizard walks through detection, choice configuration, plan preview,
and confirmation.
.TP
.B scan
Print a read-only summary of the detected host and the
\fIcompatibility report\fR (each finding is rated PASS / WARN / FAIL).
Mutates nothing.
.TP
.B plan
Build a dry-run plan from the detected state and the recommended
defaults. Each step in the plan declares the files it touches, the
commands it would run, the verification it expects, and the rollback
path. Mutates nothing.
.TP
\fBapply\fR \fB\-\-phase\fR \fIa\fR [\fB\-\-confirm\fR]
Apply Phase A of the plan: capture a snapshot, edit the bootloader's
kernel command line, write the VFIO modprobe snippet, and rebuild the
initramfs. Without \fB\-\-confirm\fR the command prints what
\fIwould\fR happen but does not write anything.

After Phase A finishes the host must be rebooted into the new kernel
before
.B virtu resume
can complete the post-reboot work.
.TP
.B resume
Continue an apply after the host has rebooted. Reads the pending-plan
record persisted by Phase A, verifies that the IOMMU is now active and
the passthrough GPU is bound to vfio-pci, and then runs the remaining
post-reboot steps (VM XML generation, libvirt registration, single-GPU
hooks when applicable).
.TP
\fBrollback\fR [\fB\-\-list\fR] [\fB\-\-to\fR \fISNAPSHOT_ID\fR]
Without flags, prints help. With \fB\-\-list\fR, lists every snapshot
under \fI~/.virtu/snapshots/\fR with its timestamp and a summary of
the steps it covers. With \fB\-\-to \fISNAPSHOT_ID\fR, restores every
file the named snapshot recorded back to its pre-edit bytes and runs
any compensating actions (\fIvirsh undefine\fR, hook script removal,
etc.).
.TP
.B status
Print the live VFIO and IOMMU state of the host plus a one-line
\fI[NOTE]\fR banner if there is a pending Phase-A apply waiting for
.BR resume .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.virtu/snapshots/<id>/manifest.toml
Snapshot manifest. Records every backed-up path, its pre-edit and
post-edit SHA-256 hashes, the originating step, and the rollback
actions that should run when the snapshot is restored.
.TP
.I ~/.virtu/state/pending.toml
Pending-plan record. Written by Phase A; read by
.BR resume .
Existence of this file blocks a fresh
.B virtu apply
to prevent overlapping in-flight applies.
.TP
.I ~/.virtu/logs/<timestamp>.log
Per-invocation log. Captures every step the tool ran, including the
exact commands and their exit codes.
.SH SAFETY MODEL
.B virtu
treats every host change as reversible. It refuses to:
.IP \(bu 2
mutate any file without first capturing it in a snapshot manifest;
.IP \(bu 2
run as root \fI(use targeted sudo for individual commands instead)\fR;
.IP \(bu 2
write a hook script that has not first passed
.BR "bash \-n" ;
.IP \(bu 2
register a libvirt domain whose XML has not first passed
.BR virt\-xml\-validate (1).
.PP
Risky paths \(em single-GPU hooks, ACS override, anything that could
leave the host without a usable display \(em require explicit user
confirmation in the wizard or via
.BR "\-\-confirm" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
A documented failure mode (compatibility blocker, validation error,
host divergence, missing pending plan). The accompanying message
explains the cause and points at the rollback id when applicable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libvirt (8),
.BR qemu\-system\-x86_64 (1),
.BR virt\-install (1),
.BR virsh (1),
.BR virt\-xml\-validate (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Virtu Contributors. Source: <https://github.com/H-Sami/Virtu>
